Add 1.9.0 Release Announcement (#244)
apache/flink-web: _posts/2019-08-15-release-1.9.0.md

---
layout: post 
title:  "Apache Flink 1.9.0 Release Announcement" 
date: 2019-8-11 12:00:00 
categories: news
---

The Apache Flink community is proud to announce the release of Apache Flink
1.9.0.

The Apache Flink project's goal is to develop a stream processing system to
unify and power many forms of real-time and offline data processing
applications as well as event-driven applications. In this release, we have
made a huge step forward in that effort, by integrating Flink’s stream and
batch processing capabilities under a single, unified runtime.

> Significant features on this path are batch-style recovery for batch jobs and

Author: The Hive integration is mentioned at the end of the paragraph, together with the Python preview.
I see this release as a foundational step towards the full batch story, that's why I think mentioning the "engine stuff" in the beginning makes sense. Python, hive integration, new sql type system etc. will get the attention they deserve in the next release, once they are complete.

a preview of the new Blink-based query engine for Table API and SQL queries.
We are also excited to announce the availability of the State Processor API,
which is one of the most frequently requested features and enables users to
read and write savepoints with Flink DataSet jobs. Finally, Flink 1.9 includes
a reworked WebUI and previews of Flink’s new Python Table API and its
integration with the Apache Hive ecosystem.

This blog post describes all major new features and improvements, important
changes to be aware of and what to expect moving forward. For more details,
check the [complete release
changelog](https://issues.apache.org/jira/secure/ReleaseNote.jspa?projectId=12315522&version=12344601).

The binary distribution and source artifacts for this release are now
available via the [Downloads](https://flink.apache.org/downloads.html) page of
the Flink project, along with the updated
[documentation](https://ci.apache.org/projects/flink/flink-docs-release-1.9/).
Flink 1.9 is API-compatible with previous 1.x releases for APIs annotated with

> the @Public annotation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the `@Public` annotation.
```

Please feel encouraged to download the release and share your thoughts with
the community through the Flink [mailing
lists](https://flink.apache.org/community.html#mailing-lists) or
[JIRA](https://issues.apache.org/jira/projects/FLINK/summary). As always,
feedback is very much appreciated!

{% toc %}

## New Features and Improvements

### Fine-grained Batch Recovery (FLIP-1)

The time to recover a batch (DataSet, Table API and SQL) job from a task
failure was significantly reduced. Until Flink 1.9, task failures in batch
jobs were recovered by canceling all tasks and restarting the whole job, i.e,
the job was started from scratch and all progress was voided. With this
release, Flink persists intermediate results at network shuffle boundaries and
use this data to limit the recovery to only those tasks that are affected by

> the failure. So-called failover regions of tasks which are connected via

Reviewer 2: on the _**So-called failover regions of tasks**_, I would add "..." on the failover regions 

so this should be: _So-called "failover regions" of tasks_

> the failure. So-called failover regions of tasks which are connected via

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the failure. So-called "failover regions" of tasks which are connected via
```

pipelined data exchanges define the boundaries among which tasks are affected
by failures. More details are available in
[FLIP-1](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/FLIP-1+%3A+Fine+Grained+Recovery+from+Task+Failures).

![alt_text]({{site.baseurl}}/img/blog/release-19-flip1.png "Fine-grained Batch
Recovery")

To use this new failover strategy, you need to do the following settings:

 * Make sure you have the entry `jobmanager.execution.failover-strategy:
   region` in your `flink-conf.yaml`.

>  * Set the `ExecutionMode` to `BATCH` in the `ExecutionConfig`.

Reviewer 3: Setting the `ExecutionMode` is not needed if users want to use region failover strategy for “embarrassingly
parallel” streaming jobs. Setting it to `BATCH` does not break anything though.

Author: I'm not sure if I fully understand your comment.

This section is about the new fine-grained batch recovery. In my understanding, both settings need to be set to use it.
With the last paragraph (`The "Region" failover strategy also improves the recovery ... `) this is actually quite clear.

Reviewer 3: Hi Robert, sorry for the confusion. I think your statement is Ok for users and we can leave it as is.

I just meant it can be more accurate technically.
Setting `jobmanager.execution.failover-strategy: region` is to enable the strategy, which recovers failed tasks in region granularity.
Setting `ExecutionMode` to `BATCH` is to break DataSet batch jobs into more regions. This improves the region failover experience but is not a necessary part to enable region failover. It does not work for batch SQL cases as well. However, it also does have negative effects for other cases(DataStream/SQL), so I think it's fine for users to always set it to be `BATCH`.

Reviewer 4: Thanks for your comment @zhuzhurk, I think you are right. I makes sense to clarify the purpose of these parameters and how they interact.
@rmetzger, I'll suggest a change.

> **Note:** The configuration of the 1.9 distribution has that entry by default,

Reviewer 2: _**has that entry by default**_, 

I would update this to: 
_**includes that entry by default**_,

> **Note:** The configuration of the 1.9 distribution has that entry by default,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Note:** The configuration of the 1.9 distribution includes that entry by default,
```

the (still) experimental [Queryable
State](https://ci.apache.org/projects/flink/flink-docs-stable/dev/stream/state/queryable_state.html).
This release introduces a new, powerful library to read, write and modify
state snapshots using the batch DataSet API. In practice, this means:

 * Flink job state can be bootstrapped by reading data from external systems,
   such as external databases, and converting it into a savepoint.
 * State in savepoints can be queried using any of Flink’s batch APIs
   (DataSet, Table, SQL), for example to analyze relevant state patterns or
   check for discrepancies in state that can support application auditing or
   troubleshooting.
 * The schema of state in savepoints can be migrated offline, compared to the
   previous approach requiring online migration on schema access.
 * Invalid data in savepoints can be identified and corrected.

The new State Processor API covers all variations of snapshots: savepoints,
full checkpoints and incremental checkpoints. More details are available in
[FLIP-43](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/FLIP-43%3A+State+Processor+API)

> ### Stop-with-Savepoint (FLIP-34)

Reviewer 5: For this section I'd suggest to explicitly declare:
1. The behavior of the stop command is changed, now every stop must be accompanied by a savepoint, which may slow down the job stop process although more semantically complete.
2. Although `-p savepoint-path` is marked as optional to the command, w/o this option the setting of `state.savepoints.dir` will be used as savepoint path, which has no default value. So it's better to explicitly remind user that either add `-p savepoint-path` into their existing stop job script (if any), or specify the `state.savepoints.dir` property in the job configuration.

What do you think? Thanks.

PS. More details please refer to the discussion in [PR#9030](https://github.com/apache/flink/pull/9030)

Author: What do you think @aljoscha @kl0u?

Reviewer 6: Looks correct to me. It's also mentioned in the release notes mentioned here: https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-13123.

I'll make sure it is included in the 1.9.0 release notes page that is currently in the works (https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-13712).

Author: I think that putting such detailed information into the release notes makes more sense.

[Cancelling with a
savepoint](https://ci.apache.org/projects/flink/flink-docs-stable/ops/state/savepoints.html#operations)
is a common operation for stopping/restarting, forking or updating Flink jobs.
However, the existing implementation did not guarantee output persistence to
external storage systems for exactly-once sinks. To improve the end-to-end
semantics when stopping a job, Flink 1.9 introduces a new `SUSPEND` mode to

> stop a job with savepoint that is consistent with the emitted data.

Reviewer 2: stop a job with _**a**_ savepoint

> stop a job with savepoint that is consistent with the emitted data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
stop a job with a savepoint that is consistent with the emitted data.
```

You can suspend a job with Flink’s CLI client as follows:

```
bin/flink stop -s [:targetDirectory] :jobId
```

The final job state is set to `FINISHED` on success, allowing
users to detect failures of the requested operation. 

More details are available in
[FLIP-34](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/pages/viewpage.action?pageId=103090212)

### Flink WebUI Rework

After a
[discussion](http://apache-flink-mailing-list-archive.1008284.n3.nabble.com/DISCUSS-Change-underlying-Frontend-Architecture-for-Flink-Web-Dashboard-td24902.html)
about modernizing the internals of Flink’s WebUI, this component was
reconstructed using the latest stable version of Angular — basically, a bump
from Angular 1.x to 7.x. The redesigned version is the default in 1.9.0,
however there is a link to switch to the old WebUI.

<div class="row"> <div class="col-sm-6"> <span><img class="thumbnail"
    src="{{site.baseurl}}/img/blog/release-19-web1.png" /></span> </div> <div
    class="col-sm-6"> <span><img class="thumbnail"
    src="{{site.baseurl}}/img/blog/release-19-web2.png" /></span> </div>
    </div>

> **Note:** Moving forward, we will not guarantee feature parity for the old

Reviewer 7: Replace "we ..." with "feature parity for the old version of the WebUI will not be guaranteed".

version of the WebUI.

### Preview of the new Blink SQL Query Processor

Following the [donation of
Blink]({{site.baseurl}}/news/2019/02/13/unified-batch-streaming-blink.html) to
Apache Flink, the community worked on integrating Blink’s query optimizer and
runtime for the Table API and SQL. As a first step, we refactored the
monolithic `flink-table` module into smaller modules
([FLIP-32](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/FLIP-32%3A+Restructure+flink-table+for+future+contributions)).
This resulted in a clear separation of and well-defined interfaces between the
Java and Scala API modules and the optimizer and runtime modules.

<span><img style="width:50%"
src="{{site.baseurl}}/img/blog/release-19-stack.png" /></span>

Next, we extended Blink’s planner to implement the new optimizer interface
such that there are now two pluggable query processors to execute Table API
and SQL statements: the pre-1.9 Flink processor and the new Blink-based query

> processor. The Blink query processor offers better SQL coverage (full TPC-H

Reviewer 2: should this sentence _**The Blink query processor offers better SQL coverage**_  become as follows for consistency with the previous sentence?  

_The **Blink-based** query processor offers better SQL coverage_

> processor. The Blink query processor offers better SQL coverage (full TPC-H

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
processor. The Blink-based query processor offers better SQL coverage (full TPC-H
```

coverage in 1.9, TPC-DS coverage is planned for the next release) and improved
performance for batch queries as the result of more extensive query
optimization (cost-based plan selection and more optimization rules), improved

> code-generation, and tuned operator implementations.

Reviewer: Will be great to add some improvements and features from streaming side in blink planner. Here is a draft:

```
The Blink-based query processor also provides a more powerful streaming runner, with some new features (e.g. dimension table join, TopN, deduplication) and optimizations to solve data-skew in aggregation and more useful builtin functions.
```

Author: Are these features available in the 1.9 release already?

Reviewer: Yes. They are ready in blink planner. There are many users in China are looking forward these features.

Author: Cool. I'll then include it!
The more users the better :)

Reviewer: We will add documentation for these feature as JIRA issue FLINK-13356 and FLINK-13355 described.

**Note:** The semantics and set of supported operations of the query
processors are mostly, but not fully aligned.

However, the integration of the Blink’s query processor is not fully completed
yet. Therefore, the pre-1.9 Flink processor is still the default processor in
Flink 1.9 and recommended for production settings. You can enable the Blink
processor by configuring it via the `EnvironmentSettings` when creating a
`TableEnvironment`. The selected processor must be on the classpath of the
executing Java process. For cluster setups, both query processors are
automatically loaded with the default configuration. When running a query from
your IDE you need to explicitly [add a planner

> dependency](https://ci.apache.org/projects/flink/flink-docs-master/dev/table/#table-program-dependencies)

Author: I'll update the links.

to your project.

#### **Other Improvements to the Table API and SQL**

Besides the exciting progress around the Blink planner, the community worked
on a whole set of other improvements to these interfaces, including:

 * **Scala-free Table API and SQL for Java users
   ([FLIP-32](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/FLIP-32%3A+Restructure+flink-table+for+future+contributions))**

>    As part of the refactoring and splitting of the flink-table module, we

Reviewer 7: "...two separate API modules for Java and Scala were created".

   created two separate API modules for Java and Scala. For Scala users,
   nothing really changes, but Java users can use the Table API and/or SQL now
   without pulling in a Scala dependency.

 * **Rework of the Table API Type System**
   **([FLIP-37](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/FLIP-37%3A+Rework+of+the+Table+API+Type+System))**

>    We implemented a [new data type

Reviewer 7: "The community implemented.../ A new data type system was implemented"

In general, using "we" should be discouraged.

Author: If you want to get rid of them, feel free to use the suggest feature of GitHub to replace them. I’m happy to accept those changes. 
But I realize that I would often do other mistakes, such as using passive voice when trying to remove all occurrences of “we”

   system](https://ci.apache.org/projects/flink/flink-docs-master/dev/table/types.html#data-types)
   to detach the Table API from Flink’s

>    [TypeInformation](https://ci.apache.org/projects/flink/flink-docs-release-1.8/dev/types_serialization.html#flinks-typeinformation-class)

Reviewer 8: Shall we update the link to `flink-docs-release-1.9` instead of `flink-docs-release-1.8`?

Author: Good point! Thanks

   class and improve its compliance with the SQL standard. This is still a

>    work in progress and expected to be completed for the next release. In

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   work in progress and expected to be completed in the next release. In
```

   Flink 1.9, UDFs are―among other things―not ported to the new type system
   yet.

 * **Multi-column and Multi-row Transformations for Table API**
   **([FLIP-29](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/pages/viewpage.action?pageId=97552739))**

   The functionality of the Table API was extended with a set of
   transformations that support multi-row and/or multi-column inputs and
   outputs. These transformations significantly ease the implementation of
   processing logic that would be cumbersome to implement with relational
   operators.

 * **Rework and Unification of the Catalog APIs**
   **([FLIP-30](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/FLIP-30%3A+Unified+Catalog+APIs))**

>    Some of the existing (and somewhat incomplete) interfaces for catalogs were

Author: @fhueske Did you write this original section? What's your take on Bowen's proposal?

>    Some of the existing (and somewhat incomplete) interfaces for catalogs were

Reviewer 7: I wrote this section. My understanding from the FLIP was that not all APIs were completely new, with some existing old code being refactored (e.g. ReadableCatalog).

>    Some of the existing (and somewhat incomplete) interfaces for catalogs were

Reviewer 9: The FLIP is not up to date anymore. We added much more than just what is written there. Also `ReadableCatalog` and `ReadableWritableCatalog` were merged into `Catalog`. The old interface was `ExternalCatalog` which is deprecated. So one could consider this as completely new APIs.

   reworked and, in some cases, replaced to unify the handling of internal and
   external catalogs. This effort was mainly initiated as a prerequisite for
   Hive integration (see below), but improves the overall convenience of
   managing catalog metadata in Flink.

 * **DDL Support in the SQL API
   ([FLINK-10232](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-10232))**

   Up to this point, Flink SQL only supported DML statements (e.g. `SELECT`,
   `INSERT`). External tables (table sources and sinks) had to be registered
   via Java/Scala code or configuration files. For 1.9, we added support for
   SQL DDL statements to register and remove tables and views (`CREATE TABLE,

>    DROP TABLE, CREATE VIEW, DROP VIEW)`. However, we did not add

Author: @twalthr could you quickly confirm this (I'm just asking to be really sure)

>    DROP TABLE, CREATE VIEW, DROP VIEW)`. However, we did not add

Reviewer 9: Jark is right. This is also what I wrote in the Google docs. CREATE TABLE only in API, CREATE VIEW only in SQL Client (old feature and not worth mentioning).

>    DROP TABLE, CREATE VIEW, DROP VIEW)`. However, we did not add

Author: Thanks. I'll remove it from the announcement.

   stream-specific syntax extensions to define timestamp extraction and
   watermark generation, yet. Full support for streaming use cases is planned
   for the next release.

### Preview of Full Hive Integration (FLINK-10556)

Apache Hive is widely used in Hadoop’s ecosystem to store and query large
amounts of structured data. Besides being a query processor, Hive features a
catalog called Metastore to manage and organize large datasets. A common
integration point for query processors is to integrate with Hive’s Metastore
in order to be able to tap into the data managed by Hive.

Recently, the community started implementing an external catalog for Flink’s
Table API and SQL that connects to Hive’s Metastore. In Flink 1.9, users will
be able to query and process all data that is stored in Hive. The Hive
integration also includes support to use Hive’s UDFs in Flink Table API or SQL
queries. More details are available in
[FLINK-10556](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-10556).

> While, previously, table definitions for Table API or SQL queries were always

Author: I don't see how this paragraph would fit under the "New, Unified Catalog APIs" section, as it is clearly about the hive metastore integration

> While, previously, table definitions for Table API or SQL queries were always

Reviewer 4: I think the point is that tables that are defined with the DDL can be persisted in all catalogs (incl. Metastore).
So, moving this makes sense, IMO.

> volatile, the new catalog connector also allows to persist a table in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
volatile, the new catalog connector additionally allows persisting a table in
```

Metastore that is created with a SQL DDL statement (see above). This means
that you connect to Metastore and register a table that is, for example,
backed by a Kafka topic. From now on, you can query that table whenever your
catalog is connected to Metastore.

Please note that the Hive support in Flink 1.9 is experimental. We are
planning to stabilize these features for the next release and are looking
forward to your feedback.

### Preview of the new Python Table API (FLIP-38)

This release also introduces a first version
[FLIP-38](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/FLIP-38%3A+Python+Table+API):

> A Python Table API. This marks the start towards our goal of bringing

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
of a Python Table API. This marks the start towards our goal of bringing
```

full-fledged Python support to Flink. The feature was designed as a slim
Python API wrapper around the Table API, basically translating Python Table
API method calls into Java Table API calls. In the initial version that ships

> with Flink 1.9, the Python Table API does not support UDFs yet but just

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
with Flink 1.9, the Python Table API does not support UDFs yet, but just
```

standard relational operations. Support for UDFs implemented in Python is on
the roadmap for future releases.

If you’d like to try the new Python API, you have to manually [install
PyFlink](https://ci.apache.org/projects/flink/flink-docs-master/flinkDev/building.html#build-pyflink).

> From there you can have a look at [this

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
From there, you can have a look at [this
```

walkthrough](https://ci.apache.org/projects/flink/flink-docs-master/tutorials/python_table_api.html)
or explore it on your own. The [community is currently
working](http://apache-flink-mailing-list-archive.1008284.n3.nabble.com/VOTE-Publish-the-PyFlink-into-PyPI-td31201.html)
on preparing a `pyflink` Python package that will be made available for
installation via `pip`.

## Important Changes

 * The Table API and SQL are now part of the default configuration of the
   Flink distribution. Before, the Table API and SQL had to be enabled by
   moving the corresponding JAR file from ./opt to ./lib.
 * The machine learning library (flink-ml) has been removed in preparation for

>    FLIP-39.

Reviewer 10: maybe add a link

 * The old DataSet and DataStream Python APIs have been removed in favor of

>    FLIP-38.

Reviewer 10: maybe add a link

 * Flink can be compiled and run on Java 9. Note that certain components
   interacting with external systems (connectors, filesystems, reporters) may
   not work since the respective projects may have skipped Java 9 support.

## Release Notes

Please review the [release

> notes](https://issues.apache.org/jira/secure/ReleaseNote.jspa?projectId=12315522&version=12344601)

Reviewer 10: The release notes should point to `https://ci.apache.org/projects/flink/flink-docs-release-1.9/release-notes/flink-1.9.html`. These notes need to be created first.

Author: Is there a Jira ticket for creating the 1.9 release notes?

Reviewer 10: Not that I know of. Please reach out to our RMs.

Reviewer 6: Sorry, wasn't aware this was needed.
Working on it now: https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-13712

Author: https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-13712

Reviewer 6: @rmetzger FYI: Here's the PR for the release notes - 
https://github.com/apache/flink/pull/9438

Connolly, Steven Wu, SuXingLee, TANG Wen-hui, Thomas Weise, Till Rohrmann,
Timo Walther, TisonKun, Tom Goong, TsReaper, Tzu-Li (Gordon) Tai, Ufuk Celebi,
Victor Wong, WangHengwei, Wei Zhong, WeiZhong94, Xintong Song, Xpray,
XuQianJin-Stars, Xuefu Zhang, Xupingyong, Yangze Guo, Yu Li, Yun Gao, Yun
Tang, Zhanchun Zhang, Zhenghua Gao, Zhijiang, Zhu Zhu, Zi Li, ZiLi Chen, Zili
Chen, aloys, ap, arganzheng, azagrebin, bd2019us, beyond1920, biao.liub,
blueszheng, boshu Zheng, bowen.li, chenqi, chummyhe89, chunpinghe, dcadmin,
dianfu, godfrey he, godfreyhe, guanghui01.rong, hehuiyuan, hello, hequn8128,
ifndef-SleePy, jackyyin, joongkeun.yang, klion26, lamber-ken, leesf, liguowei,
lincoln-lil, liyafan82, luoqi, mans2singh, maqingxiang, maxin, mjl, okidogi,
ozan, potseluev, qiangsi.lq, qiaoran, robbinli, shaoxuan-wang, shengqian.zhou,
shenlang.sl, shuai-xu, sunhaibotb, sunjincheng121, tianchen, tianchen92,
tison, tom_gong, vinoyang, vthinkxie, wanggeng3, wenhuitang, winifredtamg,
xl38154, xuefuz, xuyang1706, yangfei5, yanghua, yuzhao.cyz, zentol,
zhangxin516, zhangxinxing, zhaofaxian, zhijiang, zhuzhu.zz, zjuwangg, 云邪, 林小铂,

> 黄培松, 姬平, 时无两丶.

Reviewer 10: One could try to deduplicate this list. I can see TisonKun appearing 4 times (TisonKun, Zi Li, ZiLI Chen, Zili Chen).

Reviewer 8: From what I know, "云邪" is "Jark Wu" and "姬平" is "Xupingyong".

Reviewer 11: It seems we extracted at least contributors' Github id and name.

Reviewer 3: The duplicated ones I can identify are {Zhu Zhu, zhuzhu.zz}, {biao.liub, ifndef-SleePy},{Chesnay
Schepler, zentol}, {Xuefu Zhang, xuefuz}.
Extracting the contributors' display name and user name from commit, as yanghua mentioned, can help to avoid duplication. But we still need some extra efforts to revise it. Some people's git display name are not very formal compared to their JIRA name.

Author: Thanks. I've deduplicated based on your suggestions.
